---
layout: post
title:  "Safe Autonomy: Control Barrier Functions"
date:   2023-2-1
excerpt: "Ongoing Research at Texas A&M and AFRL"
# project: false
# thumbnail: "/project_files/ROM/ROM_thumbnail2.png"
tag:
- Robotics
- Run Time Assurance
- Safe Autonomy
comments: true
---

## 1   Background

Run time assurance (RTA), is a general framework that monitors the desired control actions of a known or unknown primary controller, and can intervene when necessary to ensure safety of the system. This is a very powerful tool for autonomous systems and can be employed if a few assumptions about the system are made, and the notion of safety is carefully defined. In this short summary, I will cover control barrier functions (CBF's) and an application of CBF's known as active set invariance filters (ASIF). The summary is primarily based on the following references: [1], [2].

In fact, a form of RTA was used in AFRL's Automatic Ground Collision Avoidance System (Auto-GCAS). It uses inputs from terrain mapping, aircraft location, and automation to avoid ground collisions, intervening when absolutely necessary in order to save the lives of pilots. Here's a video of the system in action:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WkZGL7RQBVw" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<center> <font size="+.6"> <b> Auto-GCAS RTA System in Action </b> </font> </center>

## 2   Preliminaries

<b>Control affine dynamics:</b>

$$ \begin{align} \label{eq: dynamics}
    \dot{\boldsymbol{x}}(t) = \boldsymbol{f}(x) + \boldsymbol{g}(x)\boldsymbol{u} \tag{1}
\end{align} $$

where both $$\boldsymbol{f}(x)$$ and $$\boldsymbol{g}(x)$$ must be Lipschitz continuous functions, meaning that each function that is defined on an interval and has a bounded first derivative.

<b>Forward Invariance:</b>

A set $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ is <i>forward invariant</i> for a dynamical system if every solution to the system from the set $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ stays in set. Mathematically, 

$$\begin{equation}
    \boldsymbol{x}(t_0) \in \mathcal{C}_S \Rightarrow \boldsymbol{x}(t) \in \mathcal{C}_S, \forall t \ge t_0 \tag{2}
\end{equation}$$


<b>Control Invariance:</b>

A set $$\mathcal{S} \subseteq X$$ is <i>control invariant</i> for a dynamical system if there exists an admissible control input $$\boldsymbol{u} \in \mathcal{U}$$ for every $$\boldsymbol{x} \in \mathcal{S}$$ such $$\boldsymbol{x}$$ remains in $$\mathcal{S}$$ for all positive time (i.e. renders $$\mathcal{S}$$ forward invariant). 

### 2.1   Safety

In the following formulations, safety is defined as a subset of the possible states the dynamical system can be described by. As such, safety is enforced using safety constraints, which are inequality constraints on functions of the state. The constraints take the form 

$$ \begin{align}
    \varphi_i(\boldsymbol{x}): \mathbb{R}^n \Rightarrow \mathbb{R}, ~ \varphi_i(\boldsymbol{x}) \ge 0, ~ \forall i \in \{1,...,N\} \tag{3}
\end{align} $$

for $$N$$ constraints. The subset of all possible states that satisfies all of the safety constraints, $$\varphi(x)$$, is referred to as the constraint set, or the allowable set,

$$ \begin{equation}
    \mathcal{C}_A := \{\boldsymbol{x} \in \mathbb{R} ~|~ \varphi_i(\boldsymbol{x}) \ge 0, ~ \forall i \in \{1,...,N\} \} \tag{4}
\end{equation} $$


## 3   Active Set Invariance Filtering

Active set invariance filters (ASIF) are a class of first-order, optimization-based RTA algorithms that are minimally invasive with respect to the safety constraints. Typically this means constructing an ASIF as a Quadratic Program (QP), where the objective function is the $$\textit{l}^{2}$$ norm of the difference between the desired input and the actual input. The constraints of the QP are known as barrier constraints. Thus for $$N$$ distinct constraints, the QP is written as,

$$ \begin{equation} \label{eq: QP}
    \boldsymbol{u}_{act}(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}_{des}) =  \argmin_{\boldsymbol{u} \in \mathcal{U}} \lVert \boldsymbol{u} - \boldsymbol{u}_{des} \rVert \tag{5}
\end{equation}$$
$$ \begin{equation} \label{eq: BC_subeq}
        \text{s.t.} ~ BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) = b_i(\boldsymbol{x}) + a_i(\boldsymbol{x})\boldsymbol{u} \ge 0, ~ \forall i = 1,...,N    \tag{6}
\end{equation} $$

Here, $$\mathcal{U}$$ is the set of admissible control inputs. The above formulation guarantees safety of the system with respect to an operational region $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ when the following two conditions are satisfied:

<ol>
  <li> If Eq.~\ref{eq: BC_subeq} is satisfied then the system is forward invariant in some set $$\mathcal{C}_S \subseteq \mathcal{C}_A$$ </li>
    $$\begin{align}
        \label{eq: BC1}
         BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) \ge 0, \forall i \in \{1,...,N\} \Rightarrow \mathcal{C}_S ~ \text{forward invariant} 
    \end{align}$$
  <li> It is possible to satisfy Eq.~\ref{eq: BC_subeq} from any state in the set $$\mathcal{C}_S$$. Mathematically, $$\forall x \in \mathcal{C}_S$$, and $$\forall i \in \{1,...,N\}$$, 
     $$ \begin{align}
         \label{eq: BC2}
         \sup_{\boldsymbol{u} \in \mathcal{U}}[BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u})] \ge 0
    \end{align}$$
  </li>
</ol>

<!-- \begin{enumerate}
    \item If Eq.~\ref{eq: BC_subeq} is satisfied then the system is forward invariant in some set $\mathcal{C}_S \subseteq \mathcal{C}_A$ 
    \begin{align}
        \label{eq: BC1}
         BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) \ge 0, \forall i \in \{1,...,N\} \Rightarrow \mathcal{C}_S ~ \text{forward invariant} 
    \end{align}
    \item It is possible to satisfy Eq.~\ref{eq: BC_subeq} from any state in the set $\mathcal{C}_S$. Mathematically, $\forall x \in \mathcal{C}_S$, and $\forall i \in \{1,...,N\}$,
    \begin{align}
         \label{eq: BC2}
         \sup_{\boldsymbol{u} \in \mathcal{U}}[BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u})] \ge 0
    \end{align}
\end{enumerate} -->

Essentially, the first condition ensures that the RTA framework will keep the states of the system within a subset of the safe set, $$\mathcal{C}_S \subseteq \mathcal{C}_A$$, as long as a control input $$\boldsymbol{u}$$ exists within $$\mathcal{U}$$ such that the barrier constraints are satisfied. The second condition ensures that there will always be a feasible input that satisfies that barrier constraints for all possible states in $$\mathcal{C}_S$$. \newline  

Now consider a set $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ that is defined as the super zero level set of a continuously differentiable function $$h: \mathbb{R}^n \Rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$, <i>i.e.</i>

$$ \begin{align}
    \label{eq: Cs1} 
    \mathcal{C}_S = \{ x \in X ~ | ~  h(x) \ge 0 \}\\ 
    \label{eq: Cs2}
    \partial \mathcal{C}_S = \{ x \in \mathcal{C}_S ~ | ~  h(x) = 0 \} 
\end{align} $$

To design a barrier constraint that satisfies Eqs. \ref{eq: BC1}, \ref{eq: BC2}, and thus ensure the forward invariance of $$\mathcal{C}_s$$, Nagumo's condition can be used. This checks a subtangentiality condition over the boundary of $$\mathcal{C}_s$$. If 

$$ \begin{align}
    \dot{h}(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) \ge 0
\end{align} $$

holds for all $$x \in \partial \mathcal{C}_S$$, then $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ is forward invariant for the system given by Eq.~\ref{eq: dynamics} under $$u(x)$$. Expanding the derivative term, and recalling notation for the Lie derivative operator $$L_p q(x) := \nabla q(x) \cdot p(x)$$,

$$\begin{align}
\dot{h}(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) &= \nabla h(\boldsymbol{x}) \cdot \dot{\boldsymbol{x}} \ge 0 \\
     &= \nabla h(\boldsymbol{x}) \cdot \boldsymbol{f}(x) + \nabla h(\boldsymbol{x}) \cdot \boldsymbol{g}(x)\boldsymbol{u}(x) \ge 0 \\
     \label{eq: constraint_intermed}
     &= L_f h(x) + L_g h(x) u(x) \ge 0
\end{align}$$

Since constraint given by Eq.~\ref{eq: constraint_intermed} only applies at the boundary of $$\mathcal{C}_S$$, is often modified using a strengthening term which allows the constraint to activate further from the boundary. 

$$\begin{align} \label{eq: constraint_classic}
     L_f h(x) + L_g h(x) u(x) + \alpha(h(x)) \ge 0
\end{align}$$

Here, $$\alpha$$ is an extended class $$\mathcal{K}_{\infty}$$ function (i.e. strictly increasing and with $$\alpha(0) = 0$$). With this particular selection of $$\alpha$$, since $$h(0) = 0$$ at the boundary, satisfaction of Eq.~\ref{eq: constraint_classic} automatically satisfies Eq.~\ref{eq: constraint_intermed}. Therefore, it is advantageous to constraint barrier constraints using 

$$ \begin{align} \label{eq: classic_BC}
    BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u}) =  L_f h(x) + L_g h(x) u(x) + \alpha(h(x)) 
\end{align} $$

This is the classical boundary condition formulation seen in most papers that use this technique. While it can sometimes be possible to obtain the functions $$h$$ and $$\alpha$$ analytically, generally to ensure that the barrier constraint satisfies Eq.~\ref{eq: BC2}, a <i>control invariant</i> subset of $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ should be found. If $$\mathcal{C}_A$$ is a control invariant subset of $$\mathcal{C}_S$$, then there always exists a strengthening function $$\alpha$$ such that Eq.~\ref{eq: BC2} is satisfied. The trick is finding a control invariant subset $$\mathcal{C}_A$$, and a safe operational region $$\mathcal{C}_S$$ that are as large as possible to allow maximum freedom to the primary controller.

If an extended class $$\mathcal{K}_{\infty}$$ function that makes $$BC_i(\boldsymbol{x},\boldsymbol{u})$$ satisfy Eq.~\ref{eq: BC2} for all $$x \in X$$, then $$h(x)$$ is a <i>control barrier function</i>! One final, <b>very important</b> note, is that the relative degree between $$h(x)$$ and $$g(x)$$ must be one, in order for the system to be able to enforce the constraints. If the relative degree is anything other than one, $$L_g h(x) = 0$$, and the control law cannot enforce the constraints. For constraints/systems that do not satisfy this condition, Higher Order CBFs (HOCBF's) may be constructed, which have a similar structure. For more information regarding HOCBF's please see [3].

## References

[1] Aaron D. Ames, Xiangru Xu, Jessy W. Grizzle, and Paulo Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic
programs for safety critical systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 62(8):3861–3876, aug 2017.

[2] Mark Leo Mote. Optimization-based approaches to safety-critical control with applications to space systems. PhD
thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2021.

[3] Wei Xiao and Calin Belta. Control barrier functions for systems with high relative degree. CoRR, abs/1903.04706, 2019. 

[4] Thomas Gurriet, Mark Mote, Andrew Singletary, Petter Nilsson, Eric Feron, and Aaron D. Ames. A scalable
safety critical control framework for nonlinear systems. IEEE Access, 8:187249–187275, 2020.